aws-setup.asciidoc, before:

== Introduction

This section describes in detail the set-up of a private Ethereum network on Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud. It deploys the MET on to this private network and describes application development against this network.

The following are the broad steps to be followed:

* Set up nodes for launch
* Configure nodes 
* Peering
* Account set-up 
* Mining
* RPC end-point
* Contract deployment and execution

=== Set up nodes for launch

==== Launch instances

To launch Ethereum nodes on AWS, follow the steps below. See here for notes on instance type: []

1. Launch an AWS EC2 `t2.micro` instance of Ubuntu 64-bit OS.
2. For now, launch the instance in the default VPC and allow it to have a public IP address.
3. Once launched, note the IP address.

Repeat steps 1 to 3 to start one more instance.

==== Install Ethereum client

1. Log onto an instance with `ssh`.
2. Install `go-ethereum` client on this machine with instructions below.
3. Create a directory by name `eth-priv`.
4. Create a file in the `eth-priv` named as `genesis.json` as shown below.

[source,bash]
----
sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
sudo add-apt-repository -y ppa:ethereum/ethereum
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y ethereum
----

=== Configure nodes

Create a JSON document for genesis block.

.genesis.json
[source,json]
----
{
    "config": {
        "chainId": 15,
        "homesteadBlock": 0,
        "eip155Block": 0,
        "eip158Block": 0
    },
    "nonce": "0x0000000000000042",
    "mixhash": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "difficulty": "0x4000",
    "alloc": {},
    "coinbase": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "timestamp": "0x00",
    "parentHash": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "gasLimit": "0xffffffff"
}
----

NOTES:
The `genesis.json` shown above has the following settings for a simplified set-up.

* `chainId` set to `15` to differentiate itself as a private Ethereum network.
* `gasLimit` is set to maximum.
* `difficulty` is set to low.

For more details on all settings, see here: [https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/q/2376/3137]

==== Initialize nodes

Follow the steps to start Ethereum on **first** machine.

[source,bash]
----
geth --data-dir eth-priv init eth-priv/genesis.json
----

==== Start blockchain
Start blockchain with the command below. Note that, the value of `--networkid` matches with the value of `chainId` in `genesis.json` file. Also, with the `--nodiscover` flag, this machine becomes a sort of host machine. Finally, this machine will listen of peering connections at port number `30333`.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --nodiscover --maxpeers 3  --port 30333 console
----

From the console, get the node value.

[source,bash]
----
admin.nodeInfo.enode
"enode://342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@[::]:30333?discport=0"
----

=== Peering

1. Log on to second machine, create folder `eth-priv` and copy `genesis.json` (created above) here. Start Ethereum with command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --maxpeers 3  --port 30333 console
----

2. From the console, add peer.

To add a peer, replace the `[::]` in the node information value (see step 3 in previous section) of the first machine with the public IP address of the first machine.

[source,bash]
----
admin.addPeer("enode://342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@18.0.0.0:30333?discport=0")
----

Use `admin.peers` function to list connected peers.

Repeat the above steps on the third machine.

On the fourth machine, add a `static-nodes.json` file in the `eth-priv` folder with the node information of the first machine. For example,

[source,json]
----
[
    "enode:///342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@18.0.0.0:30333"
]
----

==== Start nodes

1. Log onto first machine and start Ethereum with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --nodiscover --maxpeers 2  --port 30333 console
----

2. Log onto second machine and start Ethereum with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --port 30333 console
----

3. Check for connected peer with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
admin.peers
----

4. Exit with `Ctrl-D` on the third machine.

==== Set-up accounts

For now, we will set-up accounts only on the third machine. First, we launch the console as shown below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 console
----

Then, we add an account as below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" account new
----

Finally, we start the mining process so that ethers are credited to this account.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --mine
----

We can check the balance using the following command on the console.

[source,bash]
----
eth.getBalance(eth.accounts[0])
----

==== Start RPC

On the third machine, open up the RPC port to allow for communication with a client.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir eth-priv --networkid 15 --maxpeers 2 --port 30333 --rpc --rpcapi "web3,eth,personal" --rpcaddr "0.0.0.0" --rpccorsdomain "*"
----

**NOTE** that, the `--rpcaddr 0.0.0.0` value has been set for testing only. This value is **strongly discouraged**.

=== Mining

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir eth-priv --networkid 15 --maxpeers 3 --port 30333 --rpc --rpcapi "web3,eth,personal" --rpcaddr "0.0.0.0" --rpccorsdomain "*" --mine
----

=== RPC End-point

=== Contract deployment and execution

==== deployment

==== Execution

Commit message:

Improvements to basics document and new file on using puppeth

aws-setup.asciidoc, after:

== Introduction

This section describes in detail the set-up of a private Ethereum network on Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud. It deploys the *Mastering Ethereum Token MET* on to this private network and describes application development against this network.

The following are the broad steps to be followed:

* Set up nodes for launch
* Configure nodes 
* Peering
* Account set-up 
* Mining
* RPC end-point
* Contract deployment and execution

=== Set up nodes for launch

==== Launch instances

To launch Ethereum nodes on AWS, follow the steps below. See here for notes on instance type: []

1. Launch an AWS EC2 `t2.micro` instance of Ubuntu 64-bit OS.
2. For now, launch the instance in the default VPC and allow it to have a public IP address.
3. Once launched, note the IP address.

Repeat steps 1 to 3 to start one more instance.

==== Install Ethereum client

1. Log onto an instance with `ssh`.
2. Install `go-ethereum` client on this machine with instructions below.
3. Create a directory by name `eth-priv`.
4. Create a file in the `eth-priv` named as `genesis.json` as shown below.

[source,bash]
----
sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
sudo add-apt-repository -y ppa:ethereum/ethereum
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y ethereum
----

=== Configure nodes

Create a JSON document for genesis block.

.genesis.json
[source,json]
----
{
    "config": {
        "chainId": 15,
        "homesteadBlock": 0,
        "eip155Block": 0,
        "eip158Block": 0
    },
    "nonce": "0x0000000000000042",
    "mixhash": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "difficulty": "0x4000",
    "alloc": {},
    "coinbase": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "timestamp": "0x00",
    "parentHash": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "gasLimit": "0xffffffff"
}
----

NOTES:
The `genesis.json` shown above has the following settings for a simplified set-up.

* `chainId` set to `15` to differentiate itself as a private Ethereum network.
* `gasLimit` is set to maximum.
* `difficulty` is set to low.

For more details on all settings, see here: [https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/q/2376/3137]

==== Initialize nodes

Follow the steps to start Ethereum on **first** machine.

[source,bash]
----
geth --data-dir eth-priv init eth-priv/genesis.json
----

==== Start blockchain
Start blockchain with the command below. Note that, the value of `--networkid` matches with the value of `chainId` in `genesis.json` file. Also, with the `--nodiscover` flag, this machine becomes a sort of host machine. Finally, this machine will listen of peering connections at port number `30333`.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --nodiscover --maxpeers 3  --port 30333 console
----

From the console, get the node value.

[source,bash]
----
admin.nodeInfo.enode
"enode://342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@[::]:30333?discport=0"
----

=== Peering

1. Log on to second machine, create folder `eth-priv` and copy `genesis.json` (created above) here. Start Ethereum with command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --maxpeers 3  --port 30333 console
----

2. From the console, add peer.

To add a peer, replace the `[::]` in the node information value (see step 3 in previous section) of the first machine with the public IP address of the first machine.

[source,bash]
----
admin.addPeer("enode://342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@18.0.0.0:30333?discport=0")
----

Use `admin.peers` function to list connected peers.

Repeat the above steps on the third machine.

On the fourth machine, add a `static-nodes.json` file in the `eth-priv` folder with the node information of the first machine. For example,

[source,json]
----
[
    "enode:///342a11d352151b3dfeb78db02a4319e1255c9fb49bc9a1dc44485f7c1bca9cc638540833e4577016f9a6180d1e911d907280af9b3892c53120e1e30619594eba@18.0.0.0:30333"
]
----

==== Start nodes

1. Log onto first machine and start Ethereum with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --nodiscover --maxpeers 2  --port 30333 console
----

2. Log onto second machine and start Ethereum with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --port 30333 console
----

3. Check for connected peer with the command below.

[source,bash]
----
admin.peers
----

4. Exit with `Ctrl-D` on the third machine.

==== Set-up accounts

For now, we will set-up accounts only on the third machine. First, we launch the console as shown below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 console
----

Then, we add an account as below.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" account new
----

Finally, we start the mining process so that ethers are credited to this account.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir "/home/ubuntu/eth-priv" --networkid 15 --mine
----

We can check the balance using the following command on the console.

[source,bash]
----
eth.getBalance(eth.accounts[0])
----

==== Start RPC

On the third machine, open up the RPC port to allow for communication with a client.

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir eth-priv --networkid 15 --maxpeers 2 --port 30333 --rpc --rpcapi "web3,eth,personal" --rpcaddr "0.0.0.0" --rpccorsdomain "*"
----

**NOTE** that, the `--rpcaddr 0.0.0.0` value has been set for testing only. This value is **strongly discouraged**.

=== Mining

[source,bash]
----
geth --datadir eth-priv --networkid 15 --maxpeers 3 --port 30333 --rpc --rpcapi "web3,eth,personal" --rpcaddr "0.0.0.0" --rpccorsdomain "*" --mine
----

=== RPC End-point

=== Contract deployment and execution

==== deployment

==== Execution 

=== Automated deployment `puppeth`

=== Bootnodes
