devp2p-protocol.asciidoc, before:

////
Source:
https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/rlpx.md#node-discovery
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/%C3%90%CE%9EVp2p-Wire-Protocol
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethereum-Wire-Protocol
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Adaptive-Message-IDs
License: Not defined yet
Added By: @fjrojasgarcia
////

[[communications_between_nodes]]
== Communications between nodes - A simplified vision

Ethereum nodes communicate among themselves using a simple wire protocol forming a virtual or overlay _well-formed network_.
To achieve this goal, this protocol called *ÐΞVp2p*, uses technologies and standards such as *RLP*.

[[transport_protocol]]
=== Transport protocol
In order to provide confidentiality and protect against network disruption, *ÐΞVp2p* nodes use *RLPx* messages, an encrypted and authenticated _transport protocol_.
*RLPx* utilizes a routing algorithm similiar to *Kademlia*, which is a distributed hash table (*DHT*) for decentralized peer-to-peer computer networks.

*RLPx*, as an underlying transport protocol, allows among other, _"Node Discovery and Network Formation"_.
Another remarkable feature of *RLPx* is the support of _multiple protocols_ over a single connection.

When *ÐΞVp2p* nodes communicate via Internet (as they usually do), they use TCP, which provides a connection-oriented medium, but actually *ÐΞVp2p* nodes communicate in terms of packets, using the so-called facilities (or messages) provided by the underlying transport protocol *RLPx*, allowing them to communicate sending and receiving packets.

Packets are _dynamically framed_, prefixed with an _RLP_ encoded header, encrypted and authenticated. Multiplexing is achieved via the frame header which specifies the destination protocol of a packet.

==== Encrypted Handshake
Connections are established via a handshake and, once established, packets are encrypted and encapsulated as frames.

This handshake will be carried out in two phases, the first phase involves the keys exchange and the second phase will perform authentication, and as a part of *DEVp2p*, will also exchange the capabilities of each node.

==== Security - Basic considerations

All cryptographic operations are based on *secp256k1* and each node is expected to maintain a static private key which is saved and restored between sessions.

Until encryption is implemented, packets have a timestamp property to reduce the window of time for carrying out replay attacks.
It is recommended that the receiver only accepts packets created within the last 3 seconds.

Packets are signed. Verification is performed by recovering the public key from the signature and checking that it matches an expected value.

[[devp2p_messages_subprotocols]]
=== ÐΞVp2p messages and Sub-protocols
With *RLP* we can encode different types of payloads, whose types are determined by the integer value used in the first entry of the RLP.
In this way, *ÐΞVp2p*, the _basic wire protocol_, support _arbitrary sub-protocols_.

_Message IDs_ between `0x00-0x10` are reserved for *ÐΞVp2p* messages. Therefore, the message IDs of _sub-protocols_  are assumed to be from `0x10` onwards.

Sub-protocols that are not shared between peers are _ignored_.
If multiple versions of the same (equal name) sub-protocol are shared, _the numerically highest wins_.

==== Basic establishment of communication - Basic ÐΞVp2p message

As a very basic example, when two peers initiate their communication, each one greets the other with a special *ÐΞVp2p* message called *"Hello"*, which is identified by the `0x00` message ID.
Through this particular *ÐΞVp2p* *"Hello"* message, each node will disclose to its peer relevant data that will allow the communication to begin at a very basic level.

In this step, each peer will know the following information about his peer.

- The implemented *version* of the P2P protocol.
- The client *software identity*, as a human-readable string (e.g. `Ethereum(++)/1.0.0`).
- Peer *capability name* as a length-3 ASCII string. Current supported capabilities are eth, shh.
- Peer *capability version* as a positive integer.
- The *port* that the client is listening on.
- The *Unique Identity of the node* specified as a 512-bit hash.

==== Disconnection - Basic ÐΞVp2p message
To carry out an ordered disconnection, the node that wants to disconnect, will send a *ÐΞVp2p* message called *"Disconnect"*, identified by the _"0x01"_ message-id and specifying the reason for the disconnection using the parameter *"reason"*.

The *"reason"* param can take values from `0x00` to `0x10`, e.g. `0x00`: *Disconnect requested"* and `0x04`: *Too many peers"*.

==== Status - Ethereum sub-protocol example
This sub-protocol is identified by the `+0x00` message-id.

This message should be sent after the initial handshake and prior to any ethereum related messages and inform of its current state.

To do this, the node disclose to its peer the following data;

- The *Protocol version*.
- The *Network Id*.
- The *Total Difficulty of the best chain*.
- The *Hash of the best known block*.
- The *Hash of the Genesis block*.

[[known_current_networks]]
===== Known current network Ids
About networks ids here is a list of those currently known;

- 0: *Olympic*; Ethereum public pre-release testnet
- 1: *Frontier*; Homestead, Metropolis, the Ethereum public main network
- 1: *Classic*; The (un)forked public Ethereum Classic main network, chain ID 61
- 1: *Expanse*; An alternative Ethereum implementation, chain ID 2
- 2: *Morden*; The public Ethereum testnet, now Ethereum Classic testnet
- 3: *Ropsten*; The public cross-client Ethereum testnet
- 4: *Rinkeby*: The public Geth Ethereum testnet
- 42: *Kovan*; The public Parity Ethereum testnet
- 77: *Sokol*; The public POA testnet
- 99: *POA*; The public Proof of Authority Ethereum network
- 7762959: *Musicoin*; The music blockchain

==== GetBlocks - Another sub-protocol example
This sub-protocol is identified by the `+0x05` message-id.

With this message the node requests its peer the specified blocks each by its own hash.

The way to request the nodes is through a list with all the hashes of them, taking the message the following form;
....
[+0x05: P, hash_0: B_32, hash_1: B_32, ...]
....

The requesting node must not have a response message containing all the requested blocks, in which case it must request again those that have not been sent by its peer.

=== Node identity and reputation
The identity of a *ÐΞVp2p* node is a *secp256k1* public key.

Clients are free to mark down new nodes and use the node ID as a means of _determining a node's reputation_.

They can store ratings for given IDs and give preference accordingly.

Commit message:

Improved explanation of capability names

devp2p-protocol.asciidoc, after:

////
Source:
https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/rlpx.md#node-discovery
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/%C3%90%CE%9EVp2p-Wire-Protocol
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethereum-Wire-Protocol
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Adaptive-Message-IDs
License: Not defined yet
Added By: @fjrojasgarcia
////

[[communications_between_nodes]]
== Communications between nodes - A simplified vision

Ethereum nodes communicate among themselves using a simple wire protocol forming a virtual or overlay _well-formed network_.
To achieve this goal, this protocol called *ÐΞVp2p*, uses technologies and standards such as *RLP*.

[[transport_protocol]]
=== Transport protocol
In order to provide confidentiality and protect against network disruption, *ÐΞVp2p* nodes use *RLPx* messages, an encrypted and authenticated _transport protocol_.
*RLPx* utilizes a routing algorithm similiar to *Kademlia*, which is a distributed hash table (*DHT*) for decentralized peer-to-peer computer networks.

*RLPx*, as an underlying transport protocol, allows among other, _"Node Discovery and Network Formation"_.
Another remarkable feature of *RLPx* is the support of _multiple protocols_ over a single connection.

When *ÐΞVp2p* nodes communicate via Internet (as they usually do), they use TCP, which provides a connection-oriented medium, but actually *ÐΞVp2p* nodes communicate in terms of packets, using the so-called facilities (or messages) provided by the underlying transport protocol *RLPx*, allowing them to communicate sending and receiving packets.

Packets are _dynamically framed_, prefixed with an _RLP_ encoded header, encrypted and authenticated. Multiplexing is achieved via the frame header which specifies the destination protocol of a packet.

==== Encrypted Handshake
Connections are established via a handshake and, once established, packets are encrypted and encapsulated as frames.

This handshake will be carried out in two phases, the first phase involves the keys exchange and the second phase will perform authentication, and as a part of *DEVp2p*, will also exchange the capabilities of each node.

==== Security - Basic considerations

All cryptographic operations are based on *secp256k1* and each node is expected to maintain a static private key which is saved and restored between sessions.

Until encryption is implemented, packets have a timestamp property to reduce the window of time for carrying out replay attacks.
It is recommended that the receiver only accepts packets created within the last 3 seconds.

Packets are signed. Verification is performed by recovering the public key from the signature and checking that it matches an expected value.

[[devp2p_messages_subprotocols]]
=== ÐΞVp2p messages and Sub-protocols
With *RLP* we can encode different types of payloads, whose types are determined by the integer value used in the first entry of the RLP.
In this way, *ÐΞVp2p*, the _basic wire protocol_, support _arbitrary sub-protocols_.

_Message IDs_ between `0x00-0x10` are reserved for *ÐΞVp2p* messages. Therefore, the message IDs of _sub-protocols_  are assumed to be from `0x10` onwards.

Sub-protocols that are not shared between peers are _ignored_.
If multiple versions of the same (equal name) sub-protocol are shared, _the numerically highest wins_.

==== Basic establishment of communication - Basic ÐΞVp2p message

As a very basic example, when two peers initiate their communication, each one greets the other with a special *ÐΞVp2p* message called *"Hello"*, which is identified by the `0x00` message ID.
Through this particular *ÐΞVp2p* *"Hello"* message, each node will disclose to its peer relevant data that will allow the communication to begin at a very basic level.

In this step, each peer will know the following information about his peer.

- The implemented *version* of the P2P protocol.
- The client *software identity*, as a human-readable string (e.g. `Ethereum(++)/1.0.0`).
- Peer *capability name* as an ASCII string of length 3. Currently supported capability names are `eth` and `shh`.
- Peer *capability version* as a positive integer.
- The *port* that the client is listening on.
- The *Unique Identity of the node* specified as a 512-bit hash.

==== Disconnection - Basic ÐΞVp2p message
To carry out an ordered disconnection, the node that wants to disconnect, will send a *ÐΞVp2p* message called *"Disconnect"*, identified by the _"0x01"_ message-id and specifying the reason for the disconnection using the parameter *"reason"*.

The *"reason"* param can take values from `0x00` to `0x10`, e.g. `0x00`: *Disconnect requested"* and `0x04`: *Too many peers"*.

==== Status - Ethereum sub-protocol example
This sub-protocol is identified by the `+0x00` message-id.

This message should be sent after the initial handshake and prior to any ethereum related messages and inform of its current state.

To do this, the node disclose to its peer the following data;

- The *Protocol version*.
- The *Network Id*.
- The *Total Difficulty of the best chain*.
- The *Hash of the best known block*.
- The *Hash of the Genesis block*.

[[known_current_networks]]
===== Known current network Ids
About networks ids here is a list of those currently known;

- 0: *Olympic*; Ethereum public pre-release testnet
- 1: *Frontier*; Homestead, Metropolis, the Ethereum public main network
- 1: *Classic*; The (un)forked public Ethereum Classic main network, chain ID 61
- 1: *Expanse*; An alternative Ethereum implementation, chain ID 2
- 2: *Morden*; The public Ethereum testnet, now Ethereum Classic testnet
- 3: *Ropsten*; The public cross-client Ethereum testnet
- 4: *Rinkeby*: The public Geth Ethereum testnet
- 42: *Kovan*; The public Parity Ethereum testnet
- 77: *Sokol*; The public POA testnet
- 99: *POA*; The public Proof of Authority Ethereum network
- 7762959: *Musicoin*; The music blockchain

==== GetBlocks - Another sub-protocol example
This sub-protocol is identified by the `+0x05` message-id.

With this message the node requests its peer the specified blocks each by its own hash.

The way to request the nodes is through a list with all the hashes of them, taking the message the following form;
....
[+0x05: P, hash_0: B_32, hash_1: B_32, ...]
....

The requesting node must not have a response message containing all the requested blocks, in which case it must request again those that have not been sent by its peer.

=== Node identity and reputation
The identity of a *ÐΞVp2p* node is a *secp256k1* public key.

Clients are free to mark down new nodes and use the node ID as a means of _determining a node's reputation_.

They can store ratings for given IDs and give preference accordingly.
