ethereum-basics.asciidoc, before:

== Ethereum Basics

=== What is a blockchain?
Traditionally, the IT industry has developed technologies that address a class of problems. For example, in the olden days (_when?_) a common problem was around efficient storage and retrieval of data. The IT industry responded with database technologies. (_some anecdotal references here_). In the same fashion, the blockchain technology aims at addressing the problem of *decentralized consensus*. To explore this problem of decentralized consensus, let us first define consensus.

==== Consensus
The English dictionary meaning of the word _consensus_ is "agreement over something between two or more parties". (__insert citation__). In business terms, _consensus_ could mean the agreement between two or more parties (internal to an organisation or external) on the value of parameter(s) of interest to all parties involved. For example, the parameter could be inventory levels, current location or status of a shipment, ownership of equipment and so on. Traditionally, the values of such parameters have been entrusted with a central organization. For example, the central bank of a country serves as the clearing house for all banking entities (__fix language__), the road transportation office is the organisation to decide automobile ownership and so on.

Therefore, the central organisation assumes the role of _custodian of truth_ and enforces that truth to all parties who repose their faith in such an organisation.

==== Decentralized Consensus
To understand the idea of decentralized consensus, let us ask the question as, _what if, there was no central custodian of truth and yet all parties agreed upon a truth_? This is a radical question and strikes at the very existence of a central authority. It is revolutionary also because of the expected change in societal behavior where, 'looking up' a central authority has been the way to arrive at certain facts, resolve disputes, etc.

Philosophy aside, the case of decentralized consensus is to arrive at the value of parameter(s) of interest without involving a central authority. For example, across the value chain of an industry, can the parties agree on a parameter of interest? How does a buyer of a high-end garment be sure of its provenance? Can a buyer be sure that an item of jewelery does not have 'conflict minerals'?

=== What is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is the most visible implementation of blockchain technology. In terms of decentralized consensus, the parameter of interest is simply the balance in an account. Let us see the origin of this consensus problem.

In the good old days of non-electronic world, cash was the _de facto_ mechanism to conclude a transaction. So, a buyer would hand out $10 in his or her wallet to a seller in exchange of certain goods or services. At the end of the transaction, the balance in the buyer wallet is debited by $10 and the balance in the seller wallet is credited to by $10. Clean and simple - no further consensus is required on the balance in the wallets.

In the still good, but not so old days, Internet broke into scene and brought e-mail. With the 'carbon copy' (Cc) feature, it was no easy to type once and send the email to multiple recipients. If the email had an attachment of the image of a cute cat, then the image file would be replicated as many times as the recipients. Imagine money being transferred via e-mail. A $10 amount could then have been replicated and sent to multiple recipients! This glaring issue is the basis of *double spending* problem. In terms of consensus, the challenge would be the agreement on the account balance - the parameter of interest. And thus, core banking systems were born to play the role of custodian of truth on account balances. (__need evidences__)

Bitcoin establishes the decentralized consensus on account balance amongst all parties by eliminating the double spending problem without the need for a central authority.

=== What is Ethereum?
Ethereum is an open-source, globally decentralized computing infrastructure that executes programs called smart contracts. It uses a blockchain to synchronize and store the system state along with a cryptocurrency called ether to meter and constrain execution resource cost. __copied from here__ https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook/blob/develop/what-is.asciidoc#what-is-ethereum

==== Bitcoin state transition 
The Bitcoin implementation can also be seen as an implementation of a state transaction system, where, the state is the account balance. Suppose, at a certain point in time, there are only two account holders - A and B - each with a balance of $10. The account holder A, transfers $2 to B, in exchange for certain goods. Therefore, at a later point in time, the changed state is $8 balance with A and $12 balance with B. This change in state is not recorded in the systems of a central authority. Instead, it is in the Bitcoin ledger that exists on every computer in the Bitcoin network.

In summary, Bitcoin saves three things in the ledger: current balance in the account, transition and the to-be balance in the account. 

==== Generic state transition
What if, there was a decentralized system that maintained the transition of state of __any__ system? For example, the movement of goods from a factory to a customer is a state transition of the produced goods. Ethereum is that decentralized system that allows for state transition without the need for a central authority.

=== Ethereum Development
__Leading text here__ 

==== Ethereum components
By now it should be clear that, the goal of Ethereum is to provide a global, state transition system. Such a system would necessarily have the following components.
- *State store* to store the states as they transition from current to to-be.
- *Gossip protocol* to communicate with nodes to announce, amongst others, incoming transactions.
_ *Consensus algorithm* to verify the set of current state, transaction and to-be state is true.
_ *State definitions* to provide an interface to apply transitions on current state.
- *State transitions* to execute a transition on the current state.

In the Ethereum software, the mapping of the components is as follows:
|=========================================================
|Component |Technology |Remarks
|State store | LevelDB | LevelDB is the 'container' for the Merkle Patricia tree data structure that stores the state. Links: http://leveldb.org/ https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Patricia-Tree
|Gossip protocol | ÐΞV technologies | https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/%C3%90%CE%9EVp2p-Wire-Protocol
|Consensus algorithm | ethash | Proof-of-Work algorithm https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethash
|State definitions | Smart Contract programming languages | Mutan https://forum.ethereum.org/discussion/922/mutan-faq[deprecated], LLL, Serpent, Solidity, Vyper, Bamboo
https://media.consensys.net/an-introduction-to-lll-for-ethereum-smart-contract-development-e26e38ea6c23 __(GitHub URL?)__ https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Serpent https://github.com/ethereum/solidity https://github.com/ethereum/vyper https://github.com/pirapira/bamboo 
|State transitions | Ethereum Virtual Machine | https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethereum-Virtual-Machine-(EVM)-Awesome-List
|=========================================================

The complete Ethereum software, with its components, can be thought of as similar to Linux operating system with components for disk, RAM, network, security, drivers and so on. While these components are constantly developed and enhanced, application development is typically 'on top' of these compoenents with an abstract, interface layer. In Ethereum, such an abstraction layer is provided via Ethereum clients.

==== Ethereum clients
An Ethereum client can be defined as (__what is the official definition?__) an implementation of the Ethereum components discussed above. Therefore, an Ethereum client can (__should?__) do the following:
- A container for the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).
- Generate blocks for appending into state store.
- Read and append functions for the state store.
- Node discovery and communication.
- Expose end-points for external communication.

With those capabilities, an Ethereum client allows
- a developer to publish and execute Smart Contracts
- a developer to read the state store for down-stream applications
- a miner to mine for new blocks and earn ETH 

The following is a partial list of clients:
http://ethdocs.org/en/latest/ethereum-clients/choosing-a-client.html

__Build table here__

Commit message:

Added development and tools related section.

ethereum-basics.asciidoc, after:

== Ethereum Basics

=== What is a blockchain?
Traditionally, the IT industry has developed technologies that address a class of problems. For example, in the olden days (__when?__) a common problem was around efficient storage and retrieval of data. The IT industry responded with database technologies. (__some anecdotal references here__). In the same fashion, the blockchain technology aims at addressing the problem of *decentralized consensus*. To explore this problem of decentralized consensus, let us first define consensus.

==== Consensus
The English dictionary meaning of the word _consensus_ is "agreement over something between two or more parties". (__insert citation__). In business terms, _consensus_ could mean the agreement between two or more parties (internal to an organisation or external) on the value of parameter(s) of interest to all parties involved. For example, the parameter could be inventory levels, current location or status of a shipment, ownership of equipment and so on. Traditionally, the values of such parameters have been entrusted with a central organization. For example, the central bank of a country serves as the clearing house for all banking entities (__fix language__), the road transportation office is the organisation to decide automobile ownership and so on.

Therefore, the central organisation assumes the role of _custodian of truth_ and enforces that truth to all parties who repose their faith in such an organisation.

==== Decentralized Consensus
To understand the idea of decentralized consensus, let us ask the question as, _what if, there was no central custodian of truth and yet all parties agreed upon a truth_? This is a radical question and strikes at the very existence of a central authority. It is revolutionary also because of the expected change in societal behavior where, 'looking up' a central authority has been the way to arrive at certain facts, resolve disputes, etc.

Philosophy aside, the case of decentralized consensus is to arrive at the value of parameter(s) of interest without involving a central authority. For example, across the value chain of an industry, can the parties agree on a parameter of interest? How does a buyer of a high-end garment be sure of its provenance? Can a buyer be sure that an item of jewelery does not have 'conflict minerals'?

=== What is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is the most visible implementation of blockchain technology. In terms of decentralized consensus, the parameter of interest is simply the balance in an account. Let us see the origin of this consensus problem.

In the good old days of non-electronic world, cash was the _de facto_ mechanism to conclude a transaction. So, a buyer would hand out $10 in his or her wallet to a seller in exchange of certain goods or services. At the end of the transaction, the balance in the buyer wallet is debited by $10 and the balance in the seller wallet is credited to by $10. Clean and simple - no further consensus is required on the balance in the wallets.

In the still good, but not so old days, Internet broke into scene and brought e-mail. With the 'carbon copy' (Cc) feature, it was no easy to type once and send the email to multiple recipients. If the email had an attachment of the image of a cute cat, then the image file would be replicated as many times as the recipients. Imagine money being transferred via e-mail. A $10 amount could then have been replicated and sent to multiple recipients! This glaring issue is the basis of *double spending* problem. In terms of consensus, the challenge would be the agreement on the account balance - the parameter of interest. And thus, core banking systems were born to play the role of custodian of truth on account balances. (__need evidences__)

Bitcoin establishes the decentralized consensus on account balance amongst all parties by eliminating the double spending problem without the need for a central authority.

=== What is Ethereum?
Ethereum is an open-source, globally decentralized computing infrastructure that executes programs called smart contracts. It uses a blockchain to synchronize and store the system state along with a cryptocurrency called ether to meter and constrain execution resource cost. __copied from here__ https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook/blob/develop/what-is.asciidoc#what-is-ethereum

==== Bitcoin state transition 
The Bitcoin implementation can also be seen as an implementation of a state transaction system, where, the state is the account balance. Suppose, at a certain point in time, there are only two account holders - A and B - each with a balance of $10. The account holder A, transfers $2 to B, in exchange for certain goods. Therefore, at a later point in time, the changed state is $8 balance with A and $12 balance with B. This change in state is not recorded in the systems of a central authority. Instead, it is in the Bitcoin ledger that exists on every computer in the Bitcoin network.

In summary, Bitcoin saves three things in the ledger: current balance in the account, transition and the to-be balance in the account. 

==== Generic state transition
What if, there was a decentralized system that maintained the transition of state of __any__ system? For example, the movement of goods from a factory to a customer is a state transition of the produced goods. Ethereum is that decentralized system that allows for state transition without the need for a central authority.

=== Development with Ethereum 
This section will explain the expectations with respect to development with Ethereum followed by development support currently available within Ethereum eco-system.

==== Ethereum components
By now it should be clear that, the goal of Ethereum is to provide a global, state transition system. Such a system would necessarily have the following components.
- *State store* to store the states as they transition from current to to-be.
- *Gossip protocol* to communicate with nodes to announce, amongst others, incoming transactions.
_ *Consensus algorithm* to verify the set of current state, transaction and to-be state is true.
_ *State definitions* to provide an interface to apply transitions on current state.
- *State transitions* to execute a transition on the current state.

In the Ethereum software, the mapping of the components is as follows:
|=========================================================
|Component |Technology |Remarks
|State store | LevelDB | LevelDB is the 'container' for the Merkle Patricia tree data structure that stores the state. Links: http://leveldb.org/ https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Patricia-Tree
|Gossip protocol | ÐΞV technologies | https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/%C3%90%CE%9EVp2p-Wire-Protocol
|Consensus algorithm | ethash | Proof-of-Work algorithm https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethash
|State definitions | Smart Contract programming languages | Mutan https://forum.ethereum.org/discussion/922/mutan-faq[deprecated], LLL, Serpent, Solidity, Vyper, Bamboo
https://media.consensys.net/an-introduction-to-lll-for-ethereum-smart-contract-development-e26e38ea6c23 __(GitHub URL?)__ https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Serpent https://github.com/ethereum/solidity https://github.com/ethereum/vyper https://github.com/pirapira/bamboo 
|State transitions | Ethereum Virtual Machine | https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethereum-Virtual-Machine-(EVM)-Awesome-List
|=========================================================

The complete Ethereum software, with its components, can be thought of as similar to Linux operating system with components for disk, RAM, network, security, drivers and so on. While these components are constantly developed and enhanced, application development is typically 'on top' of these compoenents with an abstract, interface layer. In Ethereum, such an abstraction layer is provided via Ethereum clients.

==== Ethereum clients
An Ethereum client can be defined as (__what is the official definition?__) an implementation of the Ethereum components discussed above. Therefore, an Ethereum client can (__should?__) do the following:
- A container for the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).
- Generate blocks for appending into state store.
- Read and append functions for the state store.
- Node discovery and communication.
- Expose end-points for external communication.

With those capabilities, an Ethereum client allows
- a developer to publish and execute Smart Contracts
- a developer to read the state store for down-stream applications
- a miner to mine for new blocks and earn ETH 

The following is a partial list of clients:
http://ethdocs.org/en/latest/ethereum-clients/choosing-a-client.html

__Build table here__

When multiple such clients are grouped into a network, we get a functional Ethereum based blockchain system.

==== Application development
An abstract, but a more conventional way, of looking at application development with Ethereum is, to develop code that reads or appends a data store. This code is deployed to an Ethereum client which executes the code, creating a block and broadcasts to the decentralized network for consensus. __Is a read operation also recorded in the blockchain?__ This code is called as a Smart Contract and maybe developed in any of the languages mentioned above. __add cross-reference here__

Yet another way of looking at application development, is a traditional web or a mobile application that accesses the data store directly. For example, a blockchain explorer type of application will only read the state store (current or prior) for blocks, transactions, gas and other metrics for visualization purposes. Similarly, a Business Intelligence type of application may interpret the transactions, persisted in the data store, for better consumption by executives in an organization. Finally, the data store functions maybe exposed as APIs for consumption by external parties.

This book is focussed on development of Smart Contracts with Solidity programming language.

In summary, application development with Ethereum may comprise the following steps:
- Build or identify a network for deployment - refer section n.n
- Develop and publish Smart Contracts with Solidity - refer section n.n 
- Browse the blockchain for transaction processing - refer section n.n 

==== Development tools 
__Should this section introduce tools in general before converging on Truffle as the choice for this book?__
IDE including debugger, Blockchain explorer, Gas estimator. __Others?__
