standards-eip-erc.asciidoc, before:

[[ethereum_standards]]
== Ethereum Standards

[[eips]]
=== Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPs)

https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1.md

From EIP-1:

 EIP stands for Ethereum Improvement Proposal. An EIP is a design document providing information to the Ethereum community, or describing a new feature for Ethereum or its processes or environment. The EIP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale for the feature. The EIP author is responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

[[eip_workflow]]
.Ethereum Improvement Proposal Workflow
image::images/eip_workflow.png["Ethereum Improvement Proposal Workflow"]

[[ercs]]
=== Ethereum Request for Comments (ERCs)

[[bips]]
=== Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)

==== Standards from bitcoin used in Ethereum

[[eip_table]]
=== Table of Most Important EIPs and ERCs

.Important EIPs and ERCs
[options="header"]
|===
| EIP/ERC # | Title | Author | Layer | Status |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1.md[EIP-1]                                 | EIP Purpose and Guidelines                                                                  | Martin Becze, Hudson Jameson               | Meta       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-2.md[EIP-2]                                 | Homestead Hard-fork Changes                                                                  | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-6.md[EIP-6]                                 | Renaming Suicide Opcode                                                                      | Hudson Jameson                             | Interface  | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7.md[EIP-7]                                 | DELEGATECALL                                                                                 | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-8.md[EIP-8]                                 | devp2p Forward Compatibility Requirements for Homestead                                      | Felix Lange                                | Networking | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-20.md[EIP-20]                | ERC-20 Token Standard                                                                        | Fabian Vogelsteller, Vitalik Buterin       | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-55.md[EIP-55]                               | ERC-55 Mixed-case checksum address encoding                                                  | Vitalik Buterin                            | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/100[EIP-100] | Change difficulty adjustment to target mean block time including uncles                      | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-137.md[EIP-137]                             | Ethereum Domain Name Service - Specification                                                 | Nick Johnson                               | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/206[EIP-140]   | REVERT instruction                                                                           | Alex Beregszaszi, Nikolai Mushegian        | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-141.md[EIP-141]                             | Designated invalid EVM instruction                                                           | Alex Beregszaszi                           | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-150.md[EIP-150]                             | Gas cost changes for IO-heavy operations                                                     | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-155.md[EIP-155]                             | Simple replay attack protection                                                              | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-160.md[EIP-160]                             | EXP cost increase                                                                            | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-161.md[EIP-161]                           | State trie clearing (invariant-preserving alternative[EIP-161]                                       | Gavin Wood                                 | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-162.md[EIP-162]                             | ERC-162 ENS support for reverse resolution of Ethereum addresses                             | Maurelian, Nick Johnson                    | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-170.md[EIP-170]                             | Contract code size limit                                                                     | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-181.md[EIP-181]                             | ERC-181 ENS support for reverse resolution of Ethereum addresses                             | Nick Johnson                               | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-190.md[EIP-190]                             | ERC-190 Ethereum Smart Contract Packaging Standard                                           | Merriam, Coulter, Erfurt, Catalano, Matias | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/213[EIP-196]   | Precompiled contracts for addition and scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve alt_bn128 | Christian Reitwiessner                     | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/212[EIP-197]   | Precompiled contracts for optimal Ate pairing check on the elliptic curve alt_bn128          | Vitalik Buterin, Christian Reitwiessner    | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/198[EIP-198]   | Precompiled contract for bigint modular exponentiation                                       | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/211[EIP-211]   | New opcodes: RETURNDATASIZE and RETURNDATACOPY                                               | Christian Reitwiessner                     | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/214[EIP-214]   | New opcode STATICCALL                                                                        | Vitalik Buterin, Christian Reitwiessner    | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/669[EIP-649]   | Metropolis Difficulty Bomb Delay and Block Reward Reduction                                  | Afri Schoedon, Vitalik Buterin             | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/658[EIP-658]   | Embedding transaction status code in receipts                                                | Nick Johnson                               | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-706.md[EIP-706]                             | DEVp2p snappy compression                                                                    | Péter Szilágyi                             | Networking | Final    |
|===

Commit message:

Update Standards ERC EIP adding ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token (NFT) Standard

standards-eip-erc.asciidoc, after:

[[ethereum_standards]]
== Ethereum Standards

[[eips]]
=== Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPs)

https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1.md

From EIP-1:

 EIP stands for Ethereum Improvement Proposal. An EIP is a design document providing information to the Ethereum community, or describing a new feature for Ethereum or its processes or environment. The EIP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale for the feature. The EIP author is responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

[[eip_workflow]]
.Ethereum Improvement Proposal Workflow
image::images/eip_workflow.png["Ethereum Improvement Proposal Workflow"]

[[ercs]]
=== Ethereum Request for Comments (ERCs)

[[bips]]
=== Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)

==== Standards from bitcoin used in Ethereum

[[eip_table]]
=== Table of Most Important EIPs and ERCs

.Important EIPs and ERCs
[options="header"]
|===
| EIP/ERC # | Title | Author | Layer | Status |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1.md[EIP-1]                                 | EIP Purpose and Guidelines                                                                  | Martin Becze, Hudson Jameson               | Meta       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-2.md[EIP-2]                                 | Homestead Hard-fork Changes                                                                  | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-6.md[EIP-6]                                 | Renaming Suicide Opcode                                                                      | Hudson Jameson                             | Interface  | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7.md[EIP-7]                                 | DELEGATECALL                                                                                 | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-8.md[EIP-8]                                 | devp2p Forward Compatibility Requirements for Homestead                                      | Felix Lange                                | Networking | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-20.md[EIP-20]                | ERC-20 Token Standard                                                                        | Fabian Vogelsteller, Vitalik Buterin       | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-55.md[EIP-55]                               | ERC-55 Mixed-case checksum address encoding                                                  | Vitalik Buterin                            | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/100[EIP-100] | Change difficulty adjustment to target mean block time including uncles                      | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-137.md[EIP-137]                             | Ethereum Domain Name Service - Specification                                                 | Nick Johnson                               | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/206[EIP-140]   | REVERT instruction                                                                           | Alex Beregszaszi, Nikolai Mushegian        | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-141.md[EIP-141]                             | Designated invalid EVM instruction                                                           | Alex Beregszaszi                           | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-150.md[EIP-150]                             | Gas cost changes for IO-heavy operations                                                     | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-155.md[EIP-155]                             | Simple replay attack protection                                                              | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-160.md[EIP-160]                             | EXP cost increase                                                                            | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-161.md[EIP-161]                           | State trie clearing (invariant-preserving alternative[EIP-161]                                       | Gavin Wood                                 | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-162.md[EIP-162]                             | ERC-162 ENS support for reverse resolution of Ethereum addresses                             | Maurelian, Nick Johnson                    | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-170.md[EIP-170]                             | Contract code size limit                                                                     | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-181.md[EIP-181]                             | ERC-181 ENS support for reverse resolution of Ethereum addresses                             | Nick Johnson                               | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-190.md[EIP-190]                             | ERC-190 Ethereum Smart Contract Packaging Standard                                           | Merriam, Coulter, Erfurt, Catalano, Matias | ERC        | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/213[EIP-196]   | Precompiled contracts for addition and scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve alt_bn128 | Christian Reitwiessner                     | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/212[EIP-197]   | Precompiled contracts for optimal Ate pairing check on the elliptic curve alt_bn128          | Vitalik Buterin, Christian Reitwiessner    | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/198[EIP-198]   | Precompiled contract for bigint modular exponentiation                                       | Vitalik Buterin                            | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/211[EIP-211]   | New opcodes: RETURNDATASIZE and RETURNDATACOPY                                               | Christian Reitwiessner                     | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/214[EIP-214]   | New opcode STATICCALL                                                                        | Vitalik Buterin, Christian Reitwiessner    | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/669[EIP-649]   | Metropolis Difficulty Bomb Delay and Block Reward Reduction                                  | Afri Schoedon, Vitalik Buterin             | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/658[EIP-658]   | Embedding transaction status code in receipts                                                | Nick Johnson                               | Core       | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-706.md[EIP-706]                             | DEVp2p snappy compression                                                                    | Péter Szilágyi                             | Networking | Final    |
| https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/721[EIP-721]                             | ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token (NFT) Standard. It is a standard API that would allow smart contracts to operate as unique tradable non-fungible tokens (NFT) that may be tracked in standardised wallets and traded on exchanges as assets of value, similar to ERC-20. CryptoKitties was the first popularly-adopted implementation of a digital NFT in the Ethereum ecosystem.                                     | William Entriken, Dieter Shirley, Jacob Evans, Nastassia Sachs                            | Standard | Draft    |
|===
